Propose a Change to the Browser Trace Model (#20)
getsentry/rfcs: text/XXXX-browser-traces.md

* Start Date: 2022-09-28
* RFC Type: decision
* RFC PR: <link>

# Summary

This RFC proposes to require a frontend SDK to retain a trace that it continues
until the SDK naturally ends the user session.  This change is primarily to the
browser trace model to better support dynamic sampling and to create a more

> coherent user experience.

Reviewer: I believe this affects mobile as well since the concept is similar to the browser trace model, right?

Reviewer 2: Yes it will also affect mobile - by making ui.load and resulting interaction and navigation transactions linked.

   Sentry project.

2. We wanted to change our own tracing integration to start tracing on the server
   [Sentry PR #39349](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39349) where this would
   require mirroring the sampling settings to another Sentry project and would also affect
   API requests detatched from user sessions.

# Supporting Data

The [honeycomb whitepaper on front-end observability](https://www.honeycomb.io/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Front-end-Observability-Whitepaper-1.pdf)
recommends continung traces from the server until the natural end of the user Session:

> To accomplish this task, you will use the first event (page load) as the start of your trace and
> connect that first event to additional spans to build a full trace of the user session. Each span
> will represent a single thing that you want to track, such as a server request or a user click.

# Options Considered

There are multiple ways in which this problem can be addressed.

## Encouraged Root Trace Project and Session Long Traces

In the most trivial case the recommendation to customers would be to pick one project that

> starts traces for real user sessions.  This could be *either* frontend of backend but it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
starts traces for real user sessions.  This could be *either* the frontend or backend, but it
```

should attempt to be consistent about it.  In either case the client SDK should *continue the

> trace* until the browser tab naturally closes.

Reviewer 2: The issue here is with traces that then can be multiple hours long - and so then the value of analyzing a trace is completely lost.

I'm strongly against this because I feel like it'll reduce the value of trace view, and make it harder for us to expand the tracing product.

Author: That sounds a bit like a UX issue? I don't think that it's inherently problematic if a trace is very long, we today already do not draw much of a value out of the trace view.

To me it feels at least like there is more value to the trace being connected than the trace being split into transactions on every navigation.

Reviewer 3: User inactivity in a browser tab could be another natural way of ending a session, and beginning a new one. 

There could be users that leave tabs open for a very long time, and having gaps between transactions might seem weird.

The consequences are that ``startTransaction()`` always anchors to the already open trace
and dynamic sampling context.  There can be an extra flag to force the start of a new trace
but that would be strongly recommended against.

## Alternative A: Detaching Sampling Project from Root Project

An alternative approach would be to allow a transaction to start again on the client but to
continue with the sampling context that came from the server.  In that case the root of the
trace is in fact the frontend for continued transactions after a page navigate, however the
sampling context is reused from the original server side request.

In this case the relationship of root project setting the dynamic sampling context would be
broken up and instead a transaction can explicitly pick up the sampling context of another
project but still issue disconnected traces.

## Alternative B: Trace to Trace Relationships

> A potential alternative would be to continue the current project but allow a trace to annotate

Reviewer 2: As an aside, in my eyes there are various correlation ID mechanisms that we chat about, and it would be nice to get an RFC going that establishes them all. Off the top of my head:

- release id
- user id
- session id
- trace id
- profile id
- replay id (basically a session id)

The most important relationships are as follows:
- 1 users x R releases
- 1 user x S sessions/replays
- 1 user x T traces
- 1 session/replay x T traces
- 1 profile x 1 trace (though this is changing to 1 profile x T trace iirc)

If we can establish these concepts consistently it'll be a nice foundation for us to keep building off of

Reviewer 4: big +1 here, i still feel like we are moving torwards treating a trace more like a session, and it will get more and more confusing with our existing sessions/releases and session replay (which is closes to what is the standard definition of a session)

The problem we are solving for to relate transactions across a user session by exanding the inclusion of more traces in a single trace for sampling, I feel will just create more fuzzy area. Confusion for us and our users.
